[Music]
so
well good evening everybody and welcome
to the night sky
on the 17th of december and as you can
see there's the crescent moon
just in the twilight there it's actually
only four o'clock in the afternoon at
this point
and the moon is already visible such as
the uh
early evening sunsets that we have in
december here in cambridge
so we're now going to move time forward
until
just a quarter to 6 17 45 so the sun
sets and we get the classic orange
colors
of the sky the moon is following there
and then we get some other bright lights
and i just bring it to a halt here just
as sunset has completed
and we can see the moon and the two
planets jupiter
and saturn really close together in
conjunction here
which is the closest they've been for
800 years
this phenomenon won't happen again
for that long so we'll just zoom in a
little bit on that for you can see the
moon to the left
and the bright object is jupiter here
and the other one is saturn
they're actually closest together on the
19th i believe it is this month
anyway quite well worth looking out for
so we'll move up
uh to looking more towards the south
and the great square of pegasus here on
the screen and we'll let time run
forward
a little bit further to half past seven
see one or two satellites whizzing
across the screen
as the sky rotates here the square of
pegasus is in the center
but we're just going to look a little
bit lower and to the
south at the first constellation
and that's pisces the fish
you can see the stick diagram there the
heads of the fish are the two
round pieces there's the artwork with
some sort of seaweed
trail tying the two fish together
and we're starting here on our tour
because of the bright orange
object that you can clearly see there
which has been the star of the show
for several months now in the sky
and has been getting a little bit
fainter
in recent weeks and that is of course
the planet mars
let's zoom in on mars with a small
telescope you'll really only see a small
disc
roughly like this with a larger one
you'll see a bit more detail
some of the dark markings the two moons
there
phobos and demos fear and terror
aptly named for the god of war mars
but we can zoom in a little bit more
closely and see one or two more details
on the disk of mars itself
we overtook mars just in september of
this year
and now we've uh pulled away from it we
can't quite see the whole disc anymore
but what we can see is an enormous
volcano up here
absolutely huge mars has the largest
volcano in the solar system
olympus mons on it
and we could also just about make out
the faint trace of the polar cap at the
bottom
so we pulled back away from mars into a
very wide view and there's mars in
pisces
pisces one of the constellations of the
zodiac
and we'll highlight some of the others
here's aquarius for you
pisces again of course where we were
just now with mars glowing brightly in
the center
next to it ares the ram
and then as we move across we've got
taurus the bull
and gemini the twins
all lined up in a row and in fact we can
draw a line
through this constellations which
represents the path
of the planets in the sky this orange
line
is called the ecliptic and it's the
plane of
the solar system which is basically a
flat disc
you can see mars is lying very much on
the line there
and indeed jupiter and saturn that set
down towards the right
were also on the line there are other
planets that
we can find just next to mars we have
the planet uranus
we're going to zoom in on uranus and
take a good look
at the greenish disc with some of its
moons around it there oberon titania
umbrial ariel
and miranda and the faint rings there
discovered by the voyager 2 probe not
visible to
us with telescopes on earth but they
have been picked up in deep photographs
with the hubble space telescope as well
and that's what's being represented here
you see one or two faint banded markings
on
the planet and you can see it's tilted
over onto its side as well
the uh strange thing about this planet
is how it rolls along its orbit
with the axis of rotation tipped at over
90 degrees
most of the other planets are like we
are fairly
up and down with the normal arrangement
and we're moving in here on little
miranda one of its uh
five decent-sized moons the smallest one
in fact
and miranda shows signs of having been
shattered and then put
back together again as if the pieces
were put together by a blind person
doing a jigsaw
they don't seem to fit together very
well and probably the result of a cosmic
collision many millions of years ago
that nearly destroyed poor little
miranda
so we've pulled back onto a wider view
and we're now going to look
over at the constellation of andromeda
andromeda itself is very much a line of
stars with a
kink in it there and shares one star on
the corner with the great square of
pegasus that's this one
so there's the maiden andromeda and you
can see where it is in relation to
pisces the fish and uh aries there
just above them in the south at this
time
but we can already see an object of
interest and that is our neighbor galaxy
the andromeda galaxy
let's zoom right in on this this is
about a trillion stars
all orbiting around slightly larger
galaxy than
the milky way that we live in we think
we probably only have 400 million
sorry 400 billion stars we can also see
immediately
here's the hubble space telescope view
which i've overlaid
how in super detail with the dust lanes
around it
we can see a couple of these dwarf
galaxies this here is not a star
this is a small galaxy in orbit around
the main andromeda galaxy itself
fantastically detailed image
and you can pick up the main body of
andromeda very easily and you can even
see those uh
dwarf companions here's the second and
slightly larger dwarf
uh galaxy that orbits around andromeda
more separated from the main body and a
little bit fainter overall so
harder to spot but when you do it's
quite a nice little object
so we'll pull back away from andromeda
and what we'll go for next is the third
member of
our group of galaxies we have the milky
way we have the andromeda galaxy
and the third member of the group is the
triangulum galaxy
now this is a lot smaller it's a tenth
of the number of stars of the milky way
so
really quite a small galaxy very nice
spiral
structure viewed there from our face on
aspect with it and so that's well worth
tracking down
just below the constellation of
andromeda if you're going for the grand
tour
deeper into space now and also in
andromeda we have
the outer limits galaxy i was
photographing this just the other night
it
comes out very nicely you have a spiral
galaxy and it looks a bit like two fried
eggs back to back
with the bulge in the center being where
the yolks would be
and the spiral arms edge onto us showing
the enormous amount of dust
creating that dark line down the center
that's 27 million light years away so 10
times
further away than either the andromeda
or triangulum galaxies
so now we'll pull back just a little bit
further we can see
um the constellation of perseus over
here
which is this y-shaped constellation
but we're going to drill down into the
south and take another look at
one of the other planets and that's
neptune
in a small telescope it look very much
like a small blue star
but with a powerful telescope you can
zoom in and get a disk
now you may even be lucky enough to see
some dark markings like the great dark
spot here a little family of moons
and rings is get again as with all the
outer planets in fact
but there's only really one moon that
i've ever managed to track down
with my telescope these other ones we
see here are too far away too faint
but the brighter one at the bottom of
the screen there is triton
and this is a planet-sized moon it's the
same size
and almost a twin of the dwarf planet
pluto
and so very much brighter than all of
the others
we can zoom in on it and we have some
idea of the surface
and composition of triton because the
voyager
2 spacecraft that visited neptune did a
close flyby
of triton the last object on its grand
tour of the solar system
we can see those dark markings there
those are
cryo volcanoes of liquid nitrogen
spewing material onto the surface and
into the atmosphere of triton
fascinating object nobody was expecting
anything other than a
cold dead moon that far out in the solar
system
so that was neptune and that's hiding in
the constellation of aquarius at the
moment
but we're now going to go up and over to
the north
and look at one of the most recognizable
constellations
and perhaps where if you're teaching
youngsters to
navigate the night sky you should
probably start and that's the great bear
ursa major with the familiar shape here
of the plow or the saucepan
you can see that here with the handle
here and the bowl of the saucepan
and these two stars are very useful
because they point towards the pole star
but we'll start in the middle of the
handle of the saucepan
and look at these two you can just about
make these out
as separate with the unaided eye
mizar the brighter one an alcor the less
bright one
they're a double star a binary system
orbiting each other
but if we zoom right in we find that
mizar itself
is a double star as well and in fact we
could do the same trick
with alcor and so you have a pair of
doubles
orbiting each other to make a quadruple
star system
that's the middle star of the handle
or the tail of the great bear the handle
of the swordsman
just away from it we find another galaxy
that's the pinwheel galaxy
a classic face on spiral that from our
point of view
you can see a hint of the blue color
from hot young stars in the
spiral arms and the older orangey color
in the center there
here's the hubble space telescope image
in super high resolution
really showing the beauty of this object
it's about 20 million light years away
from us
so relatively close in cosmic terms but
not part of our local group
so we pulled back away from the pinwheel
galaxy
and we'll move on now to
another galaxy that's just near the tail
of the great bear
and that's the whirlpool galaxy and here
again we have a face on spiral with that
classic structure of the spiral arms but
it's in the process of
eating for breakfast it's neighboring
dwarf galaxy it's
the dwarf galaxy has come too close and
is being disrupted and torn apart by the
gravity of its larger neighbor so that's
the whirlpool galaxy that's well worth
tracking down
if you've got a 8 inch or larger
telescope aperture
for a reflector probably need for that
now also in ursa major we have a
completely different type of object
this is the owl nebula looks a little
bit like the face of an owl when you
view it through
a telescope with the eye the camera
shows up the colors
are the green here from glowing carbon
and the red
is hydrogen gas and this is a dying star
like the sun puffing off its outer
layers in its last
throes of activity before collapsing
down and forming a white dwarf in the
center
so another galaxy here this one's much
further away 45 million light years
again it's a spiral it's very much
nearly completely edge on to us very
tilted
so it's hard to see the spiral structure
but it's uh
worth tracking down if you're on a tour
of the sky
with a small telescope in this area
so we've pulled back a little bit
we can see the bowl of the big dipper
and we're just going to go above it
for a couple of galaxies that we can see
in the same field of view in fact there
are three there's the main one bodes
galaxy
it's another little galaxy here and up
here is the cigar galaxy
now bodes galaxy a classic face on
spiral there with the lovely spiral arms
it's nice and bright and easy to find
and just next door here
we'll zoom in a bit more so you can see
it better is the cigar galaxy
a little bit smaller and this one too
has come too close
and had a close encounter with bodes
galaxy about 6 million years ago
and it's caused twisting and disruption
and all of this
burst of activity out from the center
there
so we'll pull back from that little
group they were 10 and a half million
light years away
so they're not in our local group but
the next little group
over now we've moved to the
side and right up to the north to ursa
miner the little bear
little bear having a great long tail
here in the body it's like a miniature
version
of the the plow and there's the little
bear himself
and the star at the tail of the little
bear is the pole star polaris
you can see the pointer stars from the
bowl of the
plow or the saucepan point up towards it
we'll zoom in on
uh polaris the north star the pole stars
got several names
and it's a very useful for navigators
because it's always
at that north point in the sky it's also
very helpful for astronomers because
it's a special type of
yellow supergiant star that can give us
a lot of information about
the cosmic distance scale due to the way
that it pulsates in a very regular way
now we can run time backwards and
forwards here
and we're spinning time backwards to
show how the sky rotates around that
north
point and so the pole star seems to sit
still
as time goes on and all the other stars
rotate around it
this is uh it's exactly lined up with
the
earth's rotation axis running time back
the other way
to put everything back where we started
now and
the pole star remains absolutely
motionless
above hovering above the north pole of
the earth
and that's why it's always visible in
the night sky in the northern hemisphere
and always in the same place
so you can work out where you are where
north is
so that's the pole star the tail of
the little bear of course someone should
probably point out bears don't have
great long tails at this point
now on the opposite side of the sky from
the great bear we have
queen cassiopeia this w or m
shape constellation and
this is also very easy to find very
bright
and always visible to us here in
cambridge
so there's the graphic of queen
cassiopeia looking at herself in the
mirror
we've got some very interesting objects
in and around this area
i like this one this is the pac-man
nebula because it looks like the
game character from the game pac-man
snapping away as its power pills when
you look at it through a telescope
because it's upside down and backwards
in this
image but such is the way with
everything in astronomy we tend to
not worry about that due to the way that
our telescopes turn things upside down
all the time
that's the pac-man nebula
and nebula just means cloud or cloud of
gas
and the gas is glowing with that pink
color because of uh
excited hydrogen here we have a couple
of objects in one field of view we have
the
star cluster messier number 52 here
a compact uh cluster of stars all packed
together there
that were formed out of one of these
clouds
a while ago and here we have another of
these glowing hydrogen clouds
with a very powerful star in the middle
here that is blowing a bubble
hence the name bubble nebula this is
another object that i like to photograph
it's hard to find with the eye at the
telescope because the
glowing gas is really quite faint but
the camera picks it up very nicely
so we pulled back away from cassiopeia
now
and we're just going to move things on a
little bit further to
nine o'clock and see the band of the
milky way here
running across the sky running through
cassiopeia
if you put the telescope or a pair of
binoculars on that you'll see millions
and millions of stars all
closely packed together so we'll just
let time run forward there it is
and swing over to the eastern side of
the sky and the constellation of taurus
the bull
the face of taurus is this uh triangle
of stars
here it's got enormous long horns you'll
see the graphic in a moment here it
comes
you know the back half of the ball is
missing completely because
it butts up against uh aries there but
never mind
it's very striking and this star here is
an
orange giant star called aldebaran
and uh marks the eye of the bull and the
rest of the stars
in this group are further away actually
so aldebaran is nearer
it's just a line of sight effect that
places it there
riding on the back of the bull we have
the seven sisters or pleiades star
cluster
they're called the seven sisters because
there are seven very bright stars there
but actually binoculars will show you
about 50 and a telescope will show you
hundreds
and this is a you young star cluster
that's uh being formed about 500 million
years ago
and is traveling through the uh the
galaxy and gradually
will break up the stars will have close
encounters with each other and get
slingshot
away out of the crew now over by the tip
of the horn of the bull we have
the crab nebula this is the remains of
a supernova a star that was a giant star
that blew up at the end of its life very
spectacularly
was observed by chinese astronomers in
the year 1054 a.d
as a new or guest star in the sky for
several months
they could even see it in broad daylight
it was so bright until it gradually
faded
so that's it we'll bring the show to an
end there
i hope you've enjoyed that and uh hope
you get the chance to go out and observe
some of these objects
thank you very much
[Music]
more
you